MSc thesis
Master’s Programme in Computer Science
A performance comparison of rendering
strategies in open source web frontend
frameworks
Risto Ollila
April 12, 2021
F aculty of Science
University of Helsinki
Supervisor(s)
Prof. T. Mikkonen
Examiner(s)
Prof. T. Mikkonen, Dr. N. M¨ akitalo
Contact information
P. O. Box 68 (Pietari Kalmin katu 5)
00014 University of Helsinki,Finland
Email address: info@cs.helsinki.ﬁ
URL: http://www.cs.helsinki.ﬁ/
Faculty of Science Master’s Programme in Computer Science
Risto Ollila
A performance comparison of rendering strategies in open source web frontend frameworks
Prof. T. Mikkonen
MSc thesis April 12, 2021 51 pages, 14 appendice pages
web frontend frameworks, web application rendering performance, react, vue, svelte, blazor, angular
Helsinki University Library
Software study track
The Web has become the world’s most important application distribution platform, with web
pages increasingly containing not static documents, but dynamic, script-driven content. Script-
based rendering relies on imperative browser APIs which become unwieldy to use as an appli-
cation’s complexity grows. An increasingly common solution is to use libraries and frameworks
which provide an abstraction over rendering and enable a less error-prone declarative program-
ming model.
The details of how web frontend frameworks implement rendering vary widely and can po-
tentially have signiﬁcant consequences for application performance. Frameworks’ rendering
strategies are typically invisible to the application developer, and may consequently be poorly
understood despite their potential impact.
In this thesis, we review rendering strategies used in a number of inﬂuential and popular web
frontend frameworks. By studying their implementation details, we discover ways to categorize
and estimate rendering strategies’ performance based on input sizes in update loops. To verify
and measure the eﬀects of these diﬀerences, we implement a number of benchmarks that measure
diﬀerent aspects of rendering.
In our benchmarks, we discover signiﬁcant performance diﬀerences ranging up to an order
of magnitude under some conditions. Additionally, we conﬁrm that categorizing rendering
strategies based on input sizes of update loops is an eﬀective way to estimate their relative
performance. The best performing rendering strategies are found to be ones which minimize
input sizes in update loops using techniques such as compile-time optimization and reactive
programming models.
ACM Computing Classiﬁcation System (CCS)
Information systems→ World Wide Web→ Web applications
General and reference→ Cross-computing tools and techniques→ Performance
General and reference→ Cross-computing tools and techniques→ Measurement
HELSINGIN YLIOPISTO – HELSINGFORS UNIVERSITET – UNIVERSITY OF HELSINKI
Tiedekunta — F akultet — F aculty Koulutusohjelma — Utbildningsprogram — Study programme
T ekij¨ a — F¨ orfattare — Author
Ty¨ on nimi — Arbetets titel — Title
Ohjaajat — Handledare — Supervisors
Ty¨ on laji — Arbetets art — Level Aika — Datum — Month and year Sivum¨ a¨ ar¨ a — Sidoantal — Number of pages
Tiivistelm¨ a — Referat — Abstract
A vainsanat — Nyckelord — Keywords
S¨ ailytyspaikka — F¨ orvaringsst¨ alle — Where deposited
Muita tietoja — ¨ ovriga uppgifter — Additional information
Contents
1 Introduction 1
2 Rendering in a browser 3
2.1 HTML and DOM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.2 CSS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.3 JavaScript . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.4 WebAssembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.5 Critical Rendering Path . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3 Web frontend frameworks 10
3.1 Motivations for using script-based rendering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2 Design patterns in web frontend frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2.1 Model-View-ViewModel and data bindings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2.2 Rendering patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2.3 Performance considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3 Review of frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3.1 AngularJS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3.2 Angular . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3.3 React . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.3.4 Vue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3.5 Svelte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3.6 Blazor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.4 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4 Measuring rendering performance 27
4.1 Aims and methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2 Benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.2.1 Group 1: Component and element creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.2.2 Group 2: Updating components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.2.3 Group 3: Updating static content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5 Discussion 32
5.1 Analysis of benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.1.1 Group 1: Component and element creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.1.2 Group 2: Updating components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.1.3 Group 3: Updating static content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.2 Revisiting research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.2.1 RQ1: What rendering strategies are used in web frontend frameworks? 38
5.2.2 RQ2: Which factors aﬀect the performance of each strategy? . . . . 38
5.2.3 RQ3: What are the measured performance diﬀerences between strate-
gies? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2.4 Final thoughts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.3 Validity of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.4 Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6 Summary 44
Bibliography 47
A Software versions
B Full benchmark results
1 Introduction
From its humble beginnings as an application for viewing simple hyperlinked documents
containing primarily text, the browser of today is a full-ﬂedged application platform with
an ever increasing number of capabilities [31]. The journey has been in many ways un-
planned, with incremental additions to existing technologies being used in unexpected
ways to create content not necessarily originally envisaged by stewards of web standards.
Nothing exempliﬁes this better than JavaScript: initially conceived at Netscape in 1995
as a minor scripting language [39], JavaScript today is used to develop everything from
enterprise software to VR games and space shuttle GUIs [18].
Modern browsers oﬀer a multitude of ways for implementing applications [34]. Browser
extensions such as Flash and Silverlight have largely been superseded by native browser
capabilities, many of which are accessible to scripts in the browser’s JavaScript execution
context. These client-side Web APIs can be used alongside static content and enable
adding dynamic content incrementally to otherwise static web pages.
On static web pages, any changes to the document being viewed require page navigation,
where the current page is discarded and a new one fetched from the server [24]. With
techniques such as DHTML [34] and AJAX [24], it is possible to dynamically modify the
document, whether to add small bits of dynamic content or to replace page navigation
entirely [21]. These techniques, which we will collectively call script-based rendering, can
be used even if a the content on a page is primarily static, blurring the line between a web
page and a web application. The performance characteristics of a web page, therefore,
have less to do with its content than they do with the way it is rendered.
For an application to be perceived as responsive, many user interactions require almost
instantaneous feedback. One standard proposed by Miller suggests that such actions
should take no more than 100ms [23]. 50 years later, web pages may struggle to achieve
this due to the need to load resources and re-render the entire page on most user inter-
actions. Script-based rendering, on the other hand, can fetch resources asynchronously
while incrementally updating the user interface [24], or avoid resource loading entirely if
the interaction can be handled locally. Responsiveness then depends primarily on the cost
of script execution and speed of the browser’s rendering process.
Runtime costs of script-based rendering depend not only on the complexity of the applica-
2
tion, but on the tools used to implement it. Script-based rendering relies on browser APIs
which are error-prone to use in complex applications (chapter 3). As a result, we have
in recent years witnessed a rapid growth in popularity ∗ of a new generation of JavaScript
libraries and frameworks which provide an abstraction over browser APIs and greatly sim-
plify application development. When frameworks are used to manage rendering, they may
impose costs on performance depending on how they implement rendering. This poten-
tially makes the choice of a framework and its particular rendering strategy of primary
importance when developing browser applications. A poorly performing rendering strat-
egy might hinder or entirely prevent the goal of achieving responsiveness, which is the
purpose of using script-based rendering in the ﬁrst place.
In this thesis, we review a selection of open source web frontend frameworks and investigate
their rendering strategies with the aim of understanding their performance characteristics.
We will attempt to answer the following research questions:
• RQ1: What rendering strategies are used in web frontend frameworks?
• RQ2: Which factors aﬀect the performance of each strategy?
• RQ3: What are the measured performance diﬀerences between strategies?
To our knowledge, no previous work exists that attempts to systematically study script-
based rendering strategies in the context of browser applications and frontend frameworks.
Previous work has primarily focused on the costs of the initial page load, where costs
of resource loading may dominate [37], or in the performance of the browser’s content
rendering process [22]. We believe that with the rising use of web frontend frameworks,
the potential impact of script execution on responsiveness beyond initial page load deserves
to be better studied.
Before investigating frontend frameworks speciﬁcally, we will ﬁrst need to understand how
browsers render content in general. This will be explored in Chapter 2. In Chapter 3, we
will review in detail some of the more popular open source web frontend frameworks and
their approaches to rendering content. In Chapter 4 we will introduce benchmarks which
we have implemented for measuring performance diﬀerences between the frameworks, the
results of which will be discussed in Chapter 5. A conclusion with ﬁnal thoughts will be
presented in Chapter 6.
∗As measured by the annual State of JS survey at https://stateofjs.com
2 Rendering in a browser
The browser of today, despite the growth in capabilities and complexity that it has expe-
rienced over the years [31], will happily a web page built three decades ago at the web’s
inception†. This is because the fundamental building blocks of a web page remain the
same, as does the browser’s fundamental mode of operation. A web page today, as then,
consists of a document described in a markup language, and a set of resources associated
with the document. When pointed to a URL containing a web page, the browser will fetch
the page and proceed through a series of steps required to render it. In the rest of this
chapter, we will examine this rendering process and some of the technologies that enable
it as they are today.
2.1 HTML and DOM
HTML (HyperText Markup Language)‡ is the markup language that was used to describe
the earliest web pages [7], and in its updated form is used to describe the vast majority
of them today. An HTML document describes the structure and content of a web page.
It does this by describing the individual elements which the page contains, as well as
metadata such as links to any external resources associated with the page such as scripts
and stylesheets. Elements can be nested and may contain attributes such as styles, classes
or hypertext references. Certain elements, such as input elements, may be directly visible
to the user and can be interacted with, whereas others only specify structural or semantic
information (ﬁgure 2.1).
HTML is processed by browsers by parsing it into an object representation, called the
Domain Object Model (DOM) §. Oﬃcially the term ”DOM” encompasses both the tree
data structure that represents the document, as well as the programming interfaces which
scripts can use to access it. Commonly, however, ”the DOM” is used to refer speciﬁcally
to the data structure, with ”DOM APIs” referring to the programming interfaces. We will
follow this convention in this thesis.
†The ﬁrst public website can still be visited at http://info.cern.ch/
‡https://html.spec.whatwg.org/
§https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/
4
Figure 2.1: An HTML fragment and the resulting view. The input elements produce visible controls
that can be interacted with, while the wrapping div elements produce no visible output.
In HTML, the structure of a document is represented through nested elements, expressed
as tags. In the DOM, these are represented as nodes in a tree, each node and its attributes
corresponding to an HTML element and its attributes (ﬁgure 2.2).
Figure 2.2: An HTML fragment and the corresponding DOM subtree.
The DOM node tree can be modiﬁed programmatically at runtime using DOM APIs [33].
These consist of imperative functions that allow querying and direct manipulation of the
node tree, such as ﬁnding a particular node, modifying node attributes, removing nodes
or adding new nodes (ﬁgure 2.3). Because DOM APIs allow for creating arbitrary types
of nodes and node attributes, any DOM tree that can be built by parsing an HTML
document can also be built using DOM APIs.
The DOM speciﬁcation also includes an event system, where certain actions such as user
interactions or network activity can cause events to be dispatched. Scripts can attach
5
Figure 2.3: Using DOM APIs to modify the node tree.
listener functions which react to such events, which makes possible dynamic behaviour
based on user interaction. Together, the event system and node tree modiﬁcation enable
arbitrarily complex applications to be built using DOM APIs alone.
2.2 CSS
Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) is a language for deﬁning the styling and presentation of a
document. CSS is based on rules which apply a set of styles to a set of HTML elements
matching a particular selector. Selectors can be based on the tag name of an element or
on its attributes, such as its class or id attributes.
As with HTML, CSS is parsed into an object model, called CSSOM (CSS Object Model).
Whereas the DOM node tree is a structure of nodes representing elements, CSSOM is a
tree of selectors that describe the styles that should be applied to a DOM node based on its
type and attributes [10]. As with the DOM, CSSOM exposes various APIs to scripts which
can be used to programmatically modify the CSSOM node tree. In practice, CSSOM APIs
are not commonly used by web applications: any desired visual change can be achieved by
describing the possible style variations in CSS with diﬀerent rules, and then using DOM
APIs to modify DOM node attributes so that the desired nodes match a diﬀerent set of
CSS selectors, with diﬀerent styles being applied to them as a result (ﬁgure 2.4).
It is possible that there are performance diﬀerences between this commonly used approach
and that of directly modifying the CSSOM node tree, but this is beyond the scope of our
investigation. For our purposes, it is suﬃcient to be aware that web applications and web
frontend frameworks will generally rely entirely on DOM APIs, with CSS being relegated
to a more static role.
6
Figure 2.4: Using DOM APIs to change the styling of an element.
2.3 JavaScript
JavaScript∗ is a dynamically typed scripting language supported by all major browsers.
Although having its origins in the browser, JavaScript is increasingly used in other contexts
as well, with web application servers using the Node.js† runtime being the most prominent
example. A full exploration of JavaScript’s features is not possible or relevant here, but
we will note some of the features that pertain to discussion in the following chapters.
Aside from primitive types such as numbers, everything in JavaScript is an object [39]. An
object is a key-property container where both keys and properties can be of arbitrary types.
Each property has associated accessors – getters and setters – which can be optionally
deﬁned as functions to be invoked when a property is read or written. Properties further
have descriptors, which describe metadata related to the property, such as whether the
property is enumerable or writable.
Objects in JavaScript utilize prototypic inheritance [39]. All objects are part of a prototype
chain with a common object prototype sitting at the top, and objects can be created using
another object as their prototype. If an accessed property is not found in an object, each
object further up in the prototype chain will be checked in turn until either the property
is found or the end of the chain is reached.
In browsers, JavaScript is executed by default in a single thread, that being the same
thread that is used to render the user interface [20]. All JavaScript execution therefore
has the potential to degrade user experience by blocking user interaction. Browsers allow
the creation of separate worker threads that can communicate with the main thread using
events, but worker threads cannot access most browser APIs, including DOM APIs. All
web frontend frameworks presented here perform all their work in the main thread,
∗https://262.ecma-international.org/
†https://nodejs.org/
7
JavaScript is a popular target for transcompilation for other languages that wish to target
the browser as a platform. One prominent example is TypeScript ∗, a language developed
by Microsoft. TypeScript is a superset of JavaScript which adds optional static typing to
the language. It is of some interest to us in the context of web frontend frameworks, as
its use in place of JavaScript is supported by many of them and required by some.
2.4 WebAssembly
WebAssembly† is a bytecode speciﬁcation developed by the major browser vendors, with
an explicit aim of enabling the creation of high-performance web applications using lan-
guages other than JavaScript [14]. It is a somewhat immature technology still undergoing
fundamental development, and is not yet widely used. It is, however, at least partially
supported by all major browsers and WebAssembly-based web frontend frameworks al-
ready exist. We will investigate one such framework in this thesis, for which reason we
will introduce the basics concepts of WebAssembly here.
Unlike JavaScript, which is served as raw source code to be parsed and compiled by
browsers, applications targeting WebAssembly are compiled ahead of time to WebAssem-
bly bytecode. This compiled code is then executed in a WebAssembly virtual machine,
with promises of ”near-native” speeds of execution.
A central feature of WebAssembly is its embeddability: although having been born in
the browser, it places only limited requirements on the host system and has consequently
already been implemented on numerous other platforms ‡. WebAssembly code is compiled
into modules which provide an interface for importing and exporting functions from and
to the host environment. In browsers, the host environment is the browser’s JavaScript
engine. This enables straightforward interaction between JavaScript and WebAssembly:
WebAssembly modules can invoke imported JavaScript functions and export functions
which can in turn be invoked using JavaScript.
This interoperation with JavaScript is important, because WebAssembly does not have
direct access to DOM APIs [38]. Instead, all access must go through the JavaScript
interoperability layer. In practice, a WebAssembly application that wishes to use DOM
APIs can be bundled with a JavaScript counterpart that mediates API access. This raises
∗https://www.typescriptlang.org/
†https://webassembly.org/
‡For examples, see https://github.com/appcypher/awesome-wasm-runtimes
8
questions over performance: on the one hand, code executed within the WebAssembly
context itself is supposedly fast, but the requirement for interoperation with JavaScript is
a potential source of overhead.
2.5 Critical Rendering Path
The process whereby the browser turns the various resources that describe a web page
or web application into pixels on a user’s screen is called the critical rendering path by
browser vendors [11]. The various terms used by browser vendors for the diﬀerent phases
diﬀer, but major browsers all perform this along the lines of the process shown in ﬁgure
2.5 [29].
Figure 2.5: The various steps in the critical rendering path.
The process begins with parsing of source HTML to create the DOM tree. DOM cre-
ation is incremental: the node tree is constructed as the parser progresses through the
HTML document. If, during parsing, the parser encounters links to other resources, it
dispatches requests to fetch these and continues parsing and DOM construction. Once
DOM construction is ﬁnished, any stylesheets are parsed to create the CSSOM.
While the DOM contains all the elements present in a document, it cannot be used to
directly render the results, because some of the elements may not be visible. This includes
9
elements which according to rules present in the CSSOM are hidden. Therefore, once the
DOM and CSSOM have been fully constructed, the browser creates a render tree using
DOM and CSSOM. The render tree is a subset of the DOM tree containing only elements
which will be rendered, with their styling details included from the CSSOM.
When the render tree is completed, the browser calculates the sizes and positions of each
element in the tree. This process is variously called layout or reﬂow. Because the browser
cannot know which elements are visible in the viewport until the entire render tree has
been processed, no elements are actually painted until the entire tree has been processed.
After the positions and sizes have been determined, the browser will ﬁnally paint the pixels
on the screen, rendering the web page visible.
Scripts can aﬀect and halt the critical rendering path. As described previously, scripts can
use the DOM and CSSOM APIs to arbitrarily modify the DOM and CSSOM node trees.
For this reason, the browser will by default stop DOM construction when it encounters
a script tag, at which point it will fetch, parse and execute the script, before continuing
with DOM construction. It is possible to declare a script resource as asynchronous, in
which case the browser will not stop DOM construction, but will instead download the
script resource in the background and execute it once DOM construction is complete.
The critical rendering path is triggered in full only when a page is initially loaded. Various
actions can cause partial re-evaluation, however. Whenever DOM APIs are used to modify
the DOM, the render tree must be at least partially reconstructed, which triggers the
layout and paint phases as well. The layout and paint phases can also be triggered by user
interaction without the need for render tree reconstruction: some HTML elements have
built-in ways in which the user may interact with them which may cause the layout to
change. Along with script execution, the costs of render tree construction and the layout
and paint phases are the primary factors aﬀecting an application’s responsiveness when
the DOM is modiﬁed using scripts.
3 Web frontend frameworks
A web application is an application distributed via a web server and accessed using a
browser. Web applications can be rendered entirely on the server, which serves the result
to the browser as static resources. When dynamic behaviour is introduced to the browser
with scripts, the term ”web application frontend” is typically used for the portion of the
application run in the browser.
In recent years, web application frontends are increasingly created using a new genera-
tion of JavaScript frameworks. Widespread use of JavaScript libraries and frameworks is
nothing new per se, with jQuery in particular still having an overwhelming market share †.
What sets the new generation of frameworks apart from jQuery and similar tools is that
instead of just providing a more ergonomic interface to DOM APIs, they deﬁne a declara-
tive programming model where the application developer does not need to use DOM APIs
directly at all.
Although their overall market share is still modest, the popularity of such frameworks is
growing. As an example, at the time of writing 658 out of 934 or approximately 70%
of open positions advertised at Stackoverﬂow Jobs ‡ containing the keyword ’JavaScript’
also contain the keyword ’React’, the most widely used web frontend framework at the
moment§. In the rest of this chapter, we will consider the reasons for their growing
popularity and review their rendering strategies.
3.1 Motivations for using script-based rendering
Page navigation in a browser can be viewed as transitions in the state of the render tree.
Using traditional page navigation, when the user clicks on a link, the browser discards the
current page, downloads resources that make up the new page and builds a new render tree
as described in the previous chapter [24]. Any render tree state transition which can be
achieved using page navigation can also be achieved programmatically using DOM APIs,
yet the performance models of the two approaches are very diﬀerent.
†https://w3techs.com/technologies/history overview/javascript library
‡https://stackoverﬂow.com/jobs
§Based on https://2020.stateofjs.com and https://insights.stackoverﬂow.com/survey/2020
11
A render tree transition can be thought of as a solution to the tree edit distance problem,
where steps to transform one tree into another are calculated and applied [6]. Assuming a
constant cost for each individual edit action, the ideal solution is one where the minimum
number of actions are performed. From this perspective, traditional page navigation equals
giving up on even attempting to solve the problem and simply rebuilding the entire tree.
The performance cost of a UI update is thus directly dependent on the complexity of the
render tree, not on the changes made to it. Script-based rendering, on the other hand,
can make incremental changes to the DOM, so that the cost of a UI update scales linearly
with the number of changes to be made. Script-based rendering hence potentially enables
far more responsive applications, particularly when small changes to the UI are made, as
is typical in an application with a rich UI.
Another motivation for using script-based rendering is that UI transitions do not neces-
sarily require resource loading, which can be the most important single factor impacting
website performance [37]. Resource requests, when they are needed, can be completed
asynchronously, allowing the user to continue to interact with the application in the mean-
while [24]. Script-based rendering, then, is superior for use cases requiring frequent small
UI transitions. The downside is that this can be very complicated to manage in a complex
application.
In a browser, a programmatic render tree transition consists of issuing a set of imperative
DOM API calls. Typically, whenever the application state changes, appropriate changes
should be done to update the UI to reﬂect the updated application state. Given an appli-
cation with N possible valid application states, where for each possible state there exists,
on average, valid transitions to a fraction k of other states, the number of possible valid
state transitions is kN (N− 1). That is, unless from every state there exists only a single
valid transition to another state ( k = 1/(N− 1)), the number of possible valid state tran-
sitions grows exponentially as the application’s complexity grows linearly. Consequently,
if every transition must be manually accounted for, as is the case when using the DOM
APIs directly, UI management quickly becomes error-prone and unwieldy.
Web frontend frameworks solve this problem by providing an abstraction over DOM APIs.
In the component-based approach used by modern frameworks, the application developer
describes the application as a tree of components, and is concerned only with the state of
the component tree. Whenever the state of the component tree changes, the framework
takes on the task of generating the appropriate DOM API calls to update the UI to reﬂect
the new application state. This transforms the programming model from imperative to
12
declarative, greatly simplifying the application developer’s task. We believe this largely
explains the popularity of frameworks implementing the component-based model.
Because every application must in the end perform DOM updates through DOM APIs,
they all must decide on a particular strategy with which to generate the necessary DOM
API calls. For any particular UI update, the required DOM API calls do not depend on
choice of framework. However, as we will see, the amount of work required to determine
the required changes can vary massively between diﬀerent rendering strategies, and is
therefore a primary factor determining performance diﬀerences between frameworks.
3.2 Design patterns in web frontend frameworks
When reviewing rendering strategies used in frontend frameworks, we found that they often
share certain patterns, the most important of which we will describe below. Unsurprisingly,
we also discovered diﬀerences, some of which have signiﬁcant implications on performance.
Signiﬁcantly, some of these patterns can be used to estimate a rendering strategy’s relative
performance without having to measure it.
3.2.1 Model-View-ViewModel and data bindings
The various web frontend frameworks we reviewed vary in scope. Some are focused purely
on rendering, whereas others provide a wider set of tools and in some cases enable targeting
other platforms besides the browser. When used in the web application context, however,
what they all have in common is that they implement a declarative programming model
using some version of the Model-View-ViewModel (MVVM) pattern [13].
In the MVVM pattern, the Model is the application’s data source, independent of the
application’s GUI. The View consists of the concrete GUI elements presented to the user.
The ViewModel is an abstraction of the view: it contains a model of the data presented
in the view, but is not itself dependent on a concrete implementation of the view. One
central feature of the MVVM pattern is data binding: instead of requiring the applica-
tion developer to imperatively update the GUI, changes to bound data are automatically
propagated to the view. In the case of two-way data binding, changes to bound data in
the view due to user input are also automatically propagated to the model or viewmodel.
In the context of web frontend frameworks, the term ”component” is usually used instead
of ViewModel, but they are conceptually equivalent. Each component deﬁnes a subset of
13
the DOM, and deﬁnes any data bindings that should exist between the component and
the DOM. Data bindings do not only deﬁne values that should be displayed in the view as
text nodes, but can have custom logic associated with them: for example, a data binding
might be associated with an element which is conditionally rendered or hidden based on
the truthiness of the binding’s value (ﬁgure 3.1).
Figure 3.1: In this Vue component, the text ”Hello world” is conditionally rendered based on the value
of the ”showGreeting” data binding.
3.2.2 Rendering patterns
Rendering strategies in web frontend frameworks fall into one of two categories depending
on how they solve the tree edit distance problem. Some solve the problem explicitly by
comparing two trees, one representing the current state of the DOM and the other a
new desired state, and explicitly calculating the changes that must be applied to current
tree to obtain the new one. This is usually called the ”virtual DOM”-based rendering
strategy. Solving the tree edit distance problem in the general case has a time complexity
of O(n3) [25], but the authors of React, for example, claim to simplify this to O(n) by
making certain assumptions that generally hold in the web application context [28].
The other option is to solve the tree edit distance problem implicitly by applying incre-
mental changes to the DOM based on changes to individual data bindings. Regardless
of framework, the number of diﬀerent possible types of data bindings is limited. Each
data binding can then be associated with a speciﬁc type of work that can be performed
to update the DOM whenever the value of the binding changes. For example, a binding
related to conditional rendering might be associated with a function which alternatively
deletes or adds the bound element to the DOM based on the binding’s value. By walking
through each data binding and applying the requisite work wherever necessary, the sum
14
total of the changes is a solution to the tree edit distance problem.
3.2.3 Performance considerations
The basic work that every framework must perform consists of creating and updating
components and their associated elements and data bindings. All frameworks considered
here do this in a loop which walks through the component tree and, with one exception,
are able to guarantee a basic O(n) time complexity for each loop. Signiﬁcant performance
diﬀerences exist, however, and they arise from diﬀerences in input sizes and ﬁxed costs.
Diﬀerences in ﬁxed costs between various frameworks are not straightforward to quantify.
Although every framework must create and update components and data bindings, the
speciﬁc actions they must perform per component and binding are heavily dependent on
implementation details, and diﬀerences in costs are not necessarily obvious. One example
of ﬁxed costs which we encounter in numerous frameworks is dirty checking.
Dirty checking consists of storing a copy of a value, and later performing a check to see if
the value has changed. As we will see, this is often associated with data bindings, where the
framework stores a copy of value of a binding whenever it is pushed to the DOM, and later
compares the copy to the current value to determine whether an update is needed. Dirty
checking of objects is not straightforward: a reference comparison will detect if a variable
has been reassigned, but not if an object’s properties have been mutated. Determining
mutations may require a comparison of every value of every property in an object, with the
performance cost increasing in line with object complexity. Unless an object can be marked
as dirty in advance, a dirty check must choose between accuracy and performance [3].
The other factor aﬀecting performance is a render loop’s input size. This is composed
of two parts: the number of components, and the number of static elements and data
bindings per component. When a component tree is initially created, all relevant com-
ponents, elements and bindings must be created, and input sizes are therefore equivalent
regardless of framework. When already existing components are updated, however, we
witness signiﬁcant diﬀerences in input sizes between diﬀerent rendering strategies, both in
the number of components and the amount of content per component.
Ideally, an update loop will check only exactly the components and data bindings which
have changed. In practice, no framework we reviewed achieves this, and indeed one of our
primary ﬁndings is that the most signiﬁcant diﬀerentiating factor in rendering strategy
performance is the input size of an update loop . Speciﬁcally, a rendering strategy’s relative
15
performance can be estimated based on the following factors in the context of update loops:
• Which components are checked?
• Which elements are checked for each component?
• Does the framework utilize virtual DOM?
Virtual DOM incurs additional overhead due to the necessity to explicitly calculate the
required DOM changes. In eﬀect, a virtual DOM-based rendering strategy must perform
two loops: one over the component tree to build a new virtual DOM tree, and another
over the two virtual DOM trees to compare them and produce the required set of DOM
API calls.
In the review of frameworks that is to follow, we will investigate the particulars of how
frameworks diﬀer across these factors. We will additionally bring up examples of diﬀer-
ences in ﬁxed costs and related optimizations.
3.3 Review of frameworks
We have reviewed the following frameworks:
• AngularJS
• Angular
• React
• Vue
• Svelte
• Blazor
The number of open source web frontend frameworks is vast and the selection of frame-
works that we could review is necessarily limited. The selection has been based on each
framework’s popularity∗ and inﬂuence, as well as the progression shown in their rendering
strategies. As some of the most popular open source frameworks, we believe they are a
representative sample of rendering strategies in frontend frameworks in general.
∗Based on https://stackoverﬂow.com/jobs and https://stateofjs.com/
16
3.3.1 AngularJS
AngularJS∗ is one of the earliest widely used web frontend frameworks with an explicit
goal of enabling declarative programming model [16]. AngularJS is by now considered
obsolete, having been superseded by a successor confusingly also called Angular. Even
though obsolete, AngularJS makes a good starting point for our review due to its inﬂuence
and unique rendering model with both strengths and ﬂaws that have inﬂuenced later
frameworks.
In AngularJS, a component typically consists of a controller written in JavaScript and
an associated HTML template. Each controller manages a scope, which is a JavaScript
object that contains application state. In AngularJS, data bindings are two-way, and are
deﬁned directly between a scope and a template: changes to data within the scope will be
propagated to the view and vice versa irrespective of the controller. Controllers and their
scopes can be nested, eﬀectively forming a component tree. Scopes use prototype-based
inheritance, which allows bindings to properties in an ancestor scope to be deﬁned in any
descendant component [3].
AngularJS’s rendering strategy is binding-based. Templates in AngularJS can contain
custom syntax – custom elements representing components, and custom element attributes
representing data bindings – called directives (ﬁgure 3.2). Each directive is associated with
some type of custom behaviour, such as rendering a named component or rendering an
element conditionally. The browser, when it parses the initial HTML template to build the
DOM, will store the directives in the DOM as node types and node attributes which have
no intrinsic meaning. AngularJS will then walk through the DOM, ﬁnd any directives and
perform the work associated with each of them, which builds out the component tree and
registers any data bindings. Any further updates beyond the initial render are managed
through dirty checking.
AngularJS does not detect changes to application state directly, and instead expects the
application developer to use library functions that trigger an update loop either explicitly
or as part of modifying state within a scope. During an update loop, AngularJS performs
a dirty check on every data binding within the current scope as well as any ancestor and
descendant scopes, and for each dirty binding performs the required work to update the
DOM. Because AngularJS applies updates based on bindings, it does not need to update
static content after a component’s initial render. In an optimal case, an update loop
∗https://angularjs.org/
17
Figure 3.2: Directives in AngularJS: custom HTML syntax for dynamic behaviour based on data bind-
ings. Here, members of the ”alerts” array are rendered in a list, and a custom ”alert-icon” component is
rendered for each.
in AngularJS checks a subtree of the component tree consisting of the component that
initiates the update loop, its descendants and its direct ancestors.
The optimal case, however, is not guaranteed, due to AngularJS’s two-way data binding
and prototypic inheritance in scopes. Updates to the DOM resulting from dirty bind-
ings may potentially lead to changes to binding values further up in the component tree,
which can lead to further cascading changes in an unpredictable manner. In eﬀect, Angu-
larJS permits update loops to have cycles, which can both lead to diﬃcult to understand
bugs [17] and an unbounded time complexity [36].
AngularJS’s basic rendering strategy – incremental updates based on changes to bindings
– is still used by other frameworks today, and the directive-based syntax remains popu-
lar. Two-way data binding, however, has not survived, and neither has prototype-based
inheritance in component state.
3.3.2 Angular
AngularJS’s successor framework Angular ∗ borrows many concepts from its predecessor,
but is an entirely reimagined framework. Angular is a compiler-based framework: appli-
cations are written using TypeScript and compiled into JavaScript, which can then be
executed in the browser with the help of Angular’s JavaScript runtime.
Angular solves the problem of cyclical dependencies in bindings in AngularJS by using
one-way data binding and treating component state as local by default unless explicitly
shared with children. Instead of a graph with cycles, a render loop becomes a tree: each
component and binding needs to be checked at most exactly once per loop by walking down
the component tree [36]. This guarantees O(n) time complexity for each update loop.
Unsurprisingly, one way data binding and component-local state have become standard
∗https://angular.io/
18
patterns adopted by all the other frameworks reviewed here.
A component in Angular consists of a TypeScript class deﬁnition and an HTML template
extended with AngularJS-style directives, which are then compiled into a runtime compo-
nent deﬁnition. The core of a runtime component is its template function, which handles
rendering for the component. The template function is generated by the Angular compiler
by walking through the component’s template and class deﬁnition, which it uses to pro-
duce code for generating each element and for updating any data bindings. The resulting
template function contains two branches: one for the initial render of the component and
another for any subsequent updates [1].
A render loop in Angular consists of walking through the component tree and calling the
template function of each encountered component to either create or update the compo-
nent. Component creation is straightforward: the template function creates any necessary
elements and sets up any value bindings. The update branch, on the other hand, will
walk through each binding, perform a dirty check, and update the DOM if necessary. The
update branch does not need to consider static elements which will never change: only
elements with data bindings need to be checked. In AngularJS, bindings are distinguished
from static content at runtime by walking through the DOM. Angular, in contrast, pro-
cesses directives at compile time, using them to build the template function in such a way
that the update branch only handles bindings, not static content. [19].
Unlike AngularJS, Angular does not need the application developer to manually trigger a
render loop. Angular borrows a concept from the Dart language ∗ called zones [8]. A zone
is an execution context within which code – including asynchronous function calls – can
be executed and which exposes hooks that allows callback functions to be executed before
and after the code wrapped in the zone ﬁnishes executing. Angular patches any browser
events that can cause application state changes, such as user input events and HTTP data
requests, and wraps them in zones which trigger a render loop at the end of the zone’s
execution [2]. Zones do not, however, enable Angular to know which components require
an update, only that an update is needed, and an update loop will consequently walk
through the entire component tree.
Angular’s deterministic render loop makes it a straightforward improvement to its prede-
cessor in terms of performance. The compiler-based approch also ensures that updating
each component is cheap as static content does not need to be checked. Update loops as
a whole are still ineﬃcient, however, due to the need to check the entire component tree.
∗https://dart.dev
19
3.3.3 React
React∗, developed by Facebook and released as open source in 2013, introduced a rendering
strategy based on explicitly solving the tree edit distance problem [6]. In this approach, the
application manages a data structure called a virtual DOM (vDOM), which represents a
particular state of the real DOM. The steps required to update the DOM can be produced
at any given time by comparing two vDOM trees, one representing the current state of
the DOM and the other a new, desired state. In React jargon, this is called reconciliation.
As with Angular and the other frameworks reviewed here, a React application consists of
a tree of components. Each component contains a render function, which as its output
produces a single vDOM node, which is an object that describes a set of elements and their
attributes (ﬁgure 3.3). A render loop consists of walking through the component tree and
calling the render functions of each component encountered. The newly produced vDOM is
then reconciled with the previous one, and the DOM updated accordingly. Like AngularJS,
React does not detect state changes directly, requiring application developers to schedule
render loops manually by using speciﬁc library functions to update application state.
Unlike Angular, a render loop in React is performed only for the subtree of a component
which initiates the render loop, not the entire component tree [32].
Figure 3.3: A render function in a React component which procuces a very simple VDOM node.
React’s rendering strategy is remarkably simple: there is no fundamental diﬀerence be-
tween an initial render loop and subsequent update loops, or between static elements and
data bindings. Components simply describe the desired state of the DOM as a function
of application state, and reconciliation is used to determine how to update the DOM to
the desired state. This simplicity comes with costs: React does not diﬀerentiate between
static and dynamic content, and must process both on each render loop. Render functions
may also perform arbitrarily complex computations, and an update to a component will by
default require its entire subtree to be reconstructed and reconciled, regardless of whether
the output of any child components has actually changed. A more performant render loop
can be achieved by skipping the rendering of components whose output has not changed,
∗https://reactjs.org
20
or by optimizing render function performance, both of which are possible to do in React,
but must usually be done manually.
React allows application developers to instruct the framework to skip rendering a compo-
nent and its children based on custom logic. Typically, dirty checking of a component’s
props and state is used: if they have not changed, the component’s output has likely not
changed either. Aside from the usual pitfalls with dirty checking of objects, this model
can be error-prone: if a parent component decides to skip a render loop, the entire subtree
will not be updated, even if some descendants would require a re-render [26].
Render functions in React are plain JavaScript functions which can perform any type
computation. An expensive render function might perform computations on a large ar-
ray of objects, for example, and will by default do so every time the render function is
invoked, even if the output of the computation has not changed. The results of expensive
computations can be memoized, but this must be done manually and will require a dirty
check on the inputs of the memoized computation on all subsequent renders.
Render loops are the most performance-heavy operation in every framework, and thus the
most likely cause of blocking user interaction. React has in recent versions introduced
an alternative approach to address this by performing a render loop incrementally [9]. In
this implementation, React can yield execution back to the browser in the middle of a
render loop, allowing user interaction and animations to be interleaved with render loop
processing. This potentially improves user experience even if the total cost of a render
loop is not improved. This feature is currently only in experimental use, however, and by
default the entire render loop is processed in one go.
Perhaps partly due to its conceptual clarity, React has been hugely inﬂuential and sees
the most wide use of all open source web frontend frameworks. Its performance, how-
ever, remains unoptimal, which has inspired challengers to come up with solutions to its
perceived shortcomings.
3.3.4 Vue
Vue∗ utilizes a rendering strategy based on a virtual DOM and reconciliation, and is
conceptually almost identical to React. Vue components are essentially equivalent to React
components: a component is an object containing a render function, which as its output
produces a vDOM node built based on application state. There are diﬀerences in syntax:
∗https://vuejs.org
21
for instance, Vue allows the render function to be deﬁned as a HTML template with
directive-based syntax similar to Angular, but this is only syntactic sugar: the template
is parsed into a render function.
The primary innovation that Vue implements over React is a limited reactivity system.
In reactive programming, the application developer can deﬁne values as being produced
through computations dependent on other values. The runtime environment which imple-
ments the reactive programming model ensures that changes to values are automatically
propagated across dependency graphs [5]. Spreadsheets are the canonical example.
React, despite the name, does not implement a reactive programming model. React
does not keep track of dependencies between values: dependencies between computations
exist only in the sense of the order in which they are evaluated within a render function.
Unless memoized, each computation will always be re-evaluated regardless of whether it
is actually necessary. Vue, on the other hand, allows application developers to explicitly
declare reactive functions which are re-computed only when values they depend on change
(ﬁgure 3.4). This is achieved using proxies.
Figure 3.4: The ”greeting” function reactively produces an output which depends on the value of
the ”name” input received from a parent component. Whenever this value changes, the function is
automatically re-evaluated.
A proxy is a special type of JavaScript object which enables intercepting calls to properties
in a target object [35]. At runtime, Vue converts all referenced data into proxies, which
hook to the proxied object’s property accessors. When a value mediated by a proxy is
accessed, the proxy registers the accessing context, such as a reactive function, as being
dependant on the value. Whenever the value later changes, any dependant functions are
re-evaluated. Reactive values achieve the same render function performance optimization
22
as value memoization in React, but do so automatically and without the need for dirty
checking.
More signiﬁcantly, Vue’s reactivity system automatically solves the problem of determining
which components need to be checked in an update loop. A component’s render function
is treated the same way as reactive functions: it is registered as being dependent on every
value referenced in it. Whenever any of the values changes, the component is scheduled
for a re-render [27]. In eﬀect, components are marked dirty automatically, and Vue only
needs to update dirty components during a render loop.
Vue, although not requiring one, provides an optional compiler which can be used to
compile the application in advance. In addition to introducing some additional syntax
intended as quality of life improvements for application development, the compiler will
perform static analysis on application code and optimize it for runtime performance [12].
Without compilation, the Vue runtime must perform a number of checks while processing
the output of a render function. For example, when rendering an element, the runtime
must check whether the element is a Vue component or a native HTML element. The
compiler adds hints to the compiled code that the runtime can use to eliminate branching
of this kind. Possibly the most signiﬁcant optimization, however, is that the compiler
determines which portions of the render function are static – ie. will never change after
the initial render, and hoist them out of the render function, to be processed separately
only on the component’s initial render. This achieves the same end result as Angular’s
branching template function: an update to a component can ignore static content and
process data bindings only.
While borrowing its core concepts from React, Vue’s reactivity system and compile-time
optimizations allow it to reduce the input sizes of update loops compared to React’s
more naive virtual DOM implementation. Input sizes are close to optimal: only dirty
components are checked, and for each component only its data bindings. The use of
virtual DOM, however, still causes additional overhead.
3.3.5 Svelte
Similar to Angular, Svelte∗ is a compiler-based framework. A Svelte component consists of
an HTML template and an associated script (ﬁgure 3.5), which are compiled into a runtime
component deﬁnition. As with Angular, Svelte does not utilize a virtual DOM, but each
∗https://svelte.dev
23
component instead incrementally modiﬁes the DOM based on changes to bindings. Like
Angular and Vue, updating a component only checks bindings, not static content (ﬁgure
3.6). Change detection in Svelte is based on a reactivity system functionally equivalent to
that of Vue, but based on compile-time code generation.
Svelte, like Vue, allows declaring reactive values. At compile time, Svelte builds a depen-
dency graph for every value which is referred to either in the component’s template or by
any reactive value. For every value within a dependency graph, the Svelte compiler ﬁnds
every code location where the value is updated or reassigned, and inserts a call to the
Svelte runtime which marks the value and its transitive dependants as dirty and schedules
an update for the component [15]. An update loop consists of walking through every dirty
component, recomputing any dirty values in the component and then updating the DOM
wherever the recomputed values are used in data bindings.
Svelte does not explicitly track dependencies at runtime in any way. The correctness of an
update loop depends entirely on correctness of code generation: reactive values must be
updated in the correct order according to their positions in each dependency graph, and
there may not be cycles in any dependency graph. At runtime, reactivity only exists –
similarly to React – in the sense of the order within which computations are evaluated in
a component’s update function. Unlike React, however, the evaluation order is explicitly
generated from a compile-time dependency graph, which guarantees its correctness at
runtime. The result is functionally equivalent to Vue’s runtime reactivity system, but has
no runtime costs associated with proxies.
The input size of an update loop in Svelte is exactly equivalent to that of Vue: only
dirty components are checked, and for each component only bindings are checked. Svelte,
however, does not use a virtual DOM, and therefore has smaller costs overall. It is the-
oretically possible to further reduce input sizes by only checking dirty bindings – rather
than all bindings – for each component. However, because Svelte marks bindings as dirty
when they become dirty, dirty checks always consist of a simple boolean comparison re-
gardless of the complexity of the binding’s value, and therefore reducing the number of
bindings checked might not make much of a diﬀerence. Overall, of the frameworks we have
reviewed, Svelte’s rendering strategy appears to require the least amount of work. Fixed
costs, however, are likely to play a part in determining real world performance.
24
Figure 3.5: A Svelte implementation of the the Vue component in ﬁgure 3.4. The ” $:” syntax denotes
the ”greeting” variable as being reactive.
Figure 3.6: A part of the Svelte compiler output for the component in ﬁgure 3.5. Pictured are the
lifecycle hooks used to create and update the component. Note how the update function (”p”) ignores
static content processed in the create (”c”) and mount (”m”) functions.
3.3.6 Blazor
Blazor∗ is the ﬁnal framework to be introduced here. In Blazor’s case, it is not its rendering
strategy which is novel, but its implementation which is based on WebAssembly. Blazor
applications are written in C# and executed within a .Net runtime that has been compiled
ahead of time to WebAssembly bytecode. Blazor also includes a JavaScript runtime which
manages interoperation between the browser and the .Net components, particularly access
to DOM APIs.
Aside from using a diﬀerent programming language, a Blazor application is not concep-
tually any diﬀerent from that of any of the other frameworks introduced here. A Blazor
application consists of a tree of components, with each component describing a portion of
the DOM using one-way data binding and local component state optionally shared with
∗https://dotnet.microsoft.com/apps/aspnet/web-apps/blazor
25
child components.
Details of Blazor’s rendering strategy are not available as readily as those of the other
frameworks considered here, but it seems conceptually identical to React’s, being based
on virtual DOM and reconciliation [30]. Render loops are triggered either manually or on
component state changes and, as with React, will by default render the entire subtree of the
component that initiated the loop. As with React, application developers can designate
manually which components can skip a render loop. Blazor contains a default optimization,
an equivalent of which is optional in React, which skips re-rendering a component if its
inputs have not changed. Blazor will not attempt to dirty check reference type inputs,
however, opting by default to always re-render any component with complex inputs [4].
Because Blazor components are executed within the WebAssembly context, all interaction
with the DOM – both handling user input and updates pushed to the DOM – must go
through the JavaScript interoperability layer. The potential overhead caused by this is
of primary interest in the viability of any WebAssembly-based framework, beyond the
details of its rendering strategy. Blazor is the most mature WebAssembly-based frontend
framework as of yet, which makes it a suitable choice for a performance comparison with
its JavaScript-based competitors.
26
3.4 Summary
The frameworks we have introduced display an increasing sophistication in their rendering
strategies, with performance improvements often an explicit goal. The selection does not
cover the entire gamut of rendering strategies found in open source frontend frameworks,
but is a representative sample nevertheless. Interesting projects that have not been intro-
duced here include Ember∗, a long-established framework with a compiler-based approach
which utilizes a virtual machine-inspired runtime and a binding-based rendering strategy,
as well as Inferno †, a virtual DOM framework built explicitly with performance in mind
and brimming with micro-optimizations.
In table 3.1 below, we have summarized the frameworks discussed in this chapter according
to factors aﬀecting update loop input sizes as outlined in section 3.2.3.
Table 3.1: Summary of the reviewed frameworks.
Framework Components checked Elements checked Virtual DOM
AngularJS All Bindings only No
Angular All Bindings only No
React Subtree of updated component All Yes
V ue Dirty components only Bindings only Yes
Svelte Dirty components only Bindings only No
Blazor Subtree of updated component All Yes
∗https://emberjs.com/
†https://infernojs.org/
4 Measuring rendering performance
In this chapter, we describe a set of benchmarks we have implemented to measure the
rendering performance of the frameworks introduced previously. With these benchmarks,
we have attempted to verify and measure the expected relative performance diﬀerences
based on update loop input sizes. We also measure relative diﬀerences in ﬁxed costs
associated with creating components.
4.1 Aims and methodology
As outlined in the previous chapter, the script execution costs of each rendering strategy
can be expected to vary depending on whether a render loop is used to primarily create
new components or to update existing ones. The largest diﬀerences are expected to appear
in update loops, particularly under circumstances where components with large subtrees
are updated or when updated components primarily contain static content. The aim
of the benchmarks described in this chapter is to verify the existence of these expected
diﬀerences, as well as to measure their relative magnitudes. Due to the simplicity of the
components we use, our benchmarks do not quantify absolute diﬀerences in rendering
performance except in an approximate way.
Web frontend framework performance comparisons typically measure the entire duration
of a render cycle †. A problem with this approach is that a full render cycle includes
work done by the browser such as performing the layout and paint phases of the critical
rendering path. These costs, while important, are separate from and additional to script
execution. Script execution represents the true amount of work performed by a framework
and is therefore an accurate measure of its performance costs. We have therefore measured,
as accurately as possible, the duration of script execution in addition to the duration of
the entire render cycle.
There is no standard API for measuring script execution times in browsers. Chromium-
based browsers, however, implement the Chrome Devtools Protocol (CDP)‡, which enables
programmatic control over the browser, including the ability to trace script execution. We
†See for example https://github.com/krausest/js-framework-benchmark
‡https://chromedevtools.github.io/devtools-protocol/
28
have therefore implemented all tests using CDP. Tracing is based on CPU polling, which
in our tests we perform at intervals of 250 microseconds, giving millisecond-level accuracy
in our results. We repeat every individual test 10 times with each framework, and each
result is the mean value of these 10 samples,
In each benchmark described in this chapter, we have implemented an application iden-
tically with each framework. We then perform a particular action and measure the time
taken for script execution in the render cycle that follows the action. Each scenario mea-
sures the costs of a particular aspect of rendering by varying the shape of the component
tree and the actions performed.
Benchmarks were implemented for all frameworks described in the previous chapter except
for AngularJS, due to its having been superseded by Angular. For each benchmark, we
present a subset of results across a range of input sizes. Full results, including full render
cycle durations for each benchmark, can be found in appendix B.
4.2 Benchmarks
The test scenarios we implemented are designed to measure diﬀerent aspects of rendering
performance. We have divided these into three groups based on the purpose of each
benchmark.
4.2.1 Group 1: Component and element creation
This set of benchmarks was implemented with the aim of measuring performance diﬀer-
ences in a render loop that consists primarily of creating new components and elements,
such as on initial page load. The group includes three test scenarios.
In the ﬁrst scenario, we measure time taken to render static elements. The implementation
consists of a single component which renders N static elements. The results are presented
in table 4.1
In the second scenario, we measure the cost of creating components. A single parent
component is created with N child components, each of which outputs a single static
element. The resulting DOM tree is exactly identical to that in the previous scenario, but
there is additional overhead due to component construction. Table 4.2 has the results.
The ﬁnal scenario in this group also measures the cost of creating components, but the
29
shape of the component tree is diﬀerent. The motivation for using a diﬀerent shape of
component tree is to determine whether there are costs associated with having a large
number of child components in a single component. In this case, we build a binary tree-
shaped component tree, where each non-leaf component has exactly 2 children, for a total
of N components. As in the previous scenario, each component outputs a single static
element. Additionally, each component contains a single data binding used to determine
whether it should render children, which makes each individual component slightly more
expensive than in the previous scenario. The results are found in table 4.3.
Table 4.1: Script execution time (ms) when creating N static elements.
Framework N=100 N=500 N=1000 N=5000 N=10000 N=25000 N=50000
Angular 3 9 16 85 177 844 2520
React 2 9 11 77 200 956 3559
V ue 1 3 6 28 47 95 173
Svelte 1 2 3 14 24 63 98
Blazor 3 8 13 61 123 371 964
Table 4.2: Script execution time (ms) when creating N components with a single parent.
Framework N=100 N=500 N=1000 N=5000 N=10000 N=25000 N=50000
Angular 5 16 35 102 140 208 364
React 3 16 28 122 278 1128 3840
V ue 4 20 34 105 169 282 473
Svelte 1 5 10 40 72 152 252
Blazor 9 28 52 268 557 1501 3451
Table 4.3: Script execution time (ms) when creating N components as a binary tree.
Framework N=128 N=512 N=1024 N=4096 N=8192 N=16384 N=32768
Angular 20 75 120 216 297 469 774
React 7 32 55 137 233 394 733
V ue 16 53 84 223 313 485 897
Svelte 3 10 22 83 142 233 482
Blazor 17 59 128 485 966 1870 3644
30
4.2.2 Group 2: Updating components
As described previously, we expect there to be signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the number of
components that each framework must touch during an update loop, independently of
each component’s contents. This second set of tests was implemented for verifying and
measuring these diﬀerences. The group contains two benchmarks.
In both benchmarks, we utilize the same test scenario. The scenario contains a component
tree in the shape of a binary tree with a total of N components, where each non-leaf node
has two child components. The root component and all leaf components contain a single
input which can be used to perform an update that targets only the component itself.
Intermediate components produce only a single static element with no user-visible output.
The two benchmarks are identical in their setup, diﬀering only in the target component to
be updated. In the ﬁrst case, we update the root component, the results of which can be
found in table 4.4. Table 4.5 shows the results of the second benchmark, where we update
a single leaf component.
Table 4.4: Script execution time (ms) when updating the root component of a component tree of N
components.
Framework N=128 N=512 N=1024 N=4096 N=8192 N=16384 N=32768
Angular 3 12 14 32 32 43 103
React 7 23 42 92 148 211 379
V ue < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1
Svelte < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1
Blazor 3 3 2 3 3 2 3
Table 4.5: Script execution time (ms) when updating a leaf component of a component tree of N
components.
Framework N=128 N=512 N=1024 N=4096 N=8192 N=16384 N=32768
Angular 3 13 14 33 33 44 104
React 0 0 1 4 3 5 4
V ue < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1
Svelte < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1
Blazor 1 1 1 3 5 4 8
31
4.2.3 Group 3: Updating static content
The ﬁnal set of benchmarks measures the cost of updating components containing a high
proportion of static content compared to data bindings, which is likely to be typical in
real applications. The purpose of these tests is to verify the expected diﬀerences in input
sizes that must be processed for each component. The group contains two benchmarks.
As in the previous group, both benchmarks utilize the same scenario. Again, a component
tree in the shape of a binary tree is used. Each component outputs 50 static elements that
do not change after the initial render, as well as an input which can be used to update the
component locally, as in the previous scenario. Additionally, the root component contains
an input which can be used to force an update of all components in the component tree.
Table 4.6 contains the results of updating the root component but no other components,
and table 4.7 the results of updating all components.
In this group of tests, the component tree is smaller than in the previous tests. Beyond
8192 components and approximately 2 million DOM nodes, certain frameworks would
allocate more memory than available and cause the browser to crash.
Table 4.6: Script execution time (ms) when updating the root component in a component tree of N
components where each component contains primarily static content.
Framework N=128 N=256 N=512 N=1024 N=2048 N=4096 N=8192
Angular 3 5 14 23 20 24 148
React 34 43 64 98 225 278 806
V ue < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1 1 8
Svelte < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1
Blazor 4 3 3 8 10 7 8
Table 4.7: Script execution time (ms) when updating the entire component tree of N components where
each component contains primarily static content.
Framework N=128 N=256 N=512 N=1024 N=2048 N=4096 N=8192
Angular 4 8 17 27 29 44 238
React 34 44 66 101 235 289 841
V ue 20 32 42 72 91 149 311
Svelte 2 3 5 10 20 54 80
Blazor 28 60 101 250 502 1020 2013
5 Discussion
This chapter contains our analysis and interpretation of the results of the benchmarks. We
will ﬁrstly discuss and analyse the results of each benchmark. Based on our ﬁndings, we
will then review the research questions introduced in chapter 1. Finally, we will consider
the validity and applicability of our results.
5.1 Analysis of benchmarks
An overall impression of the results is that they are in line with what would be expected
given the characteristics of each rendering strategy as outlined in table 3.1. There are,
however, unexpected results as well.
5.1.1 Group 1: Component and element creation
Based on the rendering strategies used by each framework, we would not expect funda-
mental diﬀerences in their performance when initially rendering content. Two things stand
out from the results, however.
Firstly, Angular and React exhibit nonlinear performance costs when rendering a single
component containing a large number of child components or elements. This becomes
most obvious when more than 10000 elements are rendered in a single component, as seen
in ﬁgure 5.1. This eﬀect disappears when components are rendered as a binary tree, where
no single component has a large number of children, as shown in ﬁgure 5.2.
Secondly, it appears that there are signiﬁcant diﬀerences in ﬁxed costs. Blazor is a clear
outlier with signiﬁcantly worse performance than its JavaScript-based competitors. Angu-
lar, React and Vue post comparable results, but the most performant framework, Svelte,
has an edge of at least 50% over its competitors, as seen in table 5.1. While we expected
Svelte to perform well when updating components, the reasons for its superior performance
here must be explained by ﬁxed costs rather than input sizes.
From tables 4.1 and 4.2, we note that Vue, Svelte and Blazor exhibit linear performance.
From their results, it appears that rendering a single element within a separate component
33
Table 5.1: Relative costs of script execution when rendering N components as a binary tree.
Framework N=128 N=512 N=1024 N=4096 N=8192 N=16384 N=32768
Angular 6.7 7.5 5.5 2.6 2.1 2.0 1.6
React 2.3 3.2 2.5 1.7 1.6 1.7 1.5
V ue 5.3 5.3 3.8 2.7 2.2 2.1 1.9
Svelte 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Blazor 5.7 5.9 5.8 5.8 6.8 8.0 7.5
Figure 5.1: Script execution time (ms) when rendering N elements in a single component.
Figure 5.2: Script execution time (ms) when rendering N components as a binary tree.
34
Figure 5.3: Comment nodes inserted by Angular in the DOM.
roughly triples the performance cost compared to rendering it directly inside the parent
component. The costs of a single component seem hence to be reasonably low, considering
that in real-world use most components should render a far larger number of elements.
To put the results in context, we can compare script execution times to the duration of
the full render cycle. Table 5.2 contains for each framework the duration of the full render
cycle in the binary tree component creation scenario, including script execution times.
This is the true measure of rendering costs as it appears to a user. The relative diﬀerences
here are signiﬁcantly smaller than if we only consider script execution times. Given that
the components we render are very simple and thus cheap to build, and that the browser
must perform a full render tree construction cycle, this is perhaps to be expected.
The outlier here is Angular, where the diﬀerence in the cost of a full render cycle compared
to other frameworks is in fact signiﬁcantly greater than the diﬀerence in script execution
times alone. This appears to originate from the fact that Angular generates comment nodes
in the DOM when a conditional rendering directive is used (ﬁgure 5.3). While comment
nodes do not contain any meaning for the document’s structure or content, they increase
the size of the DOM tree and consequently increase the cost of render tree construction.
Such costs are real and inherent to the framework’s rendering implementation, even if not
part of script execution costs. Blazor exhibits similar behaviour under other circumstances.
5.1.2 Group 2: Updating components
When components are updated, we expect to see the best performance from the frame-
works that have to touch the least amount of components in the update loop. This is
35
Table 5.2: Duration of a full render cycle (ms) when creating a binary tree of N components.
Framework N=128 N=512 N=1024 N=4096 N=8192 N=16384 N=32768
Angular 34 117 204 556 992 1878 3654
React 14 45 77 249 464 858 1669
V ue 24 72 115 340 549 953 1836
Svelte 7 22 53 198 375 696 1407
Blazor 23 74 153 585 1172 2272 4446
exactly what we see in the results as well. When updating a leaf component, Angular
stands out as the only framework with a less-than-trivial rendering cost, having identical
performance regardless of whether a leaf or a root component is updated, as seen in tables
4.4 and 4.5. Measured in absolute terms, the cost is still relatively low, but this might
not be the case in a real-world application with more complex components to render. In
eﬀect, Angular’s rendering strategy places a minimum cost on every update that scales
linearly with the complexity of the view, which may make it unsuitable for applications
with complex views and real-time responsiveness requirements.
As expected, updating the root component also conﬁrms the costs of React’s rendering
strategy which must re-render the entire subtree of the updated component, as seen in
ﬁgure 5.4. The relative performance diﬀerence to the best performing strategies is dra-
matic, and measured in several orders of magnitude. Blazor’s default optimization of not
re-rendering components with unchanged inputs ensures that it performs well here, but
if the child components were to contain reference type inputs, we would witness a curve
similar to that of React. Other frameworks perform similarly regardless of where the com-
ponent is located, with Svelte and Vue in particular standing out with a sub-millisecond
update loop.
Again, it is useful to put these results in context by comparing script execution times to
the duration of a full render cycle. The most striking diﬀerences are found when the root
component is updated, with the full render cycle costs shown in table 5.3. Even though the
diﬀerences are smaller than if only script execution costs are considered, they still remain
at an order of magnitude of diﬀerence in the full render cycle duration between React
and Svelte. Because the changes made to the DOM are very minor, the browser’s layout
process is quick, and script execution costs become the dominant factor in the duration of
the render cycle.
36
Figure 5.4: Script execution time (ms) when updating the root component of a component tree with N
components.
Table 5.3: Duration of a full render cycle (ms) when updating the root component in a binary tree of N
components.
Framework N=128 N=512 N=1024 N=4096 N=8192 N=16384 N=32768
Angular 8 17 26 53 60 98 224
React 12 32 47 105 166 237 439
V ue 4 9 5 13 20 26 48
Svelte 7 8 4 10 12 22 24
Blazor 5 6 9 20 28 41 51
5.1.3 Group 3: Updating static content
When updating static content, we would expect to see a signiﬁcant advantage for frame-
works which only update bindings, not static content. This is exactly what we see, with
React and Blazor in particular again having a signiﬁcant disadvantage due to their inabil-
ity to diﬀerentiate between static and dynamic content. This diﬀerence is very signiﬁcant,
reaching an order of magnitude as shown in ﬁgure 5.5 and table 5.4. Svelte is again the
best performing framework overall, although the absolute diﬀerence to Angular and Vue is
small enough when the number of components is low that Angular is shown to outperform
Svelte when N=4096.
We can again compare script execution times to the duration of the full render cycle, which
37
Figure 5.5: Script execution times (ms) when updating all components in a component tree of N
components where each component contains primarily static content.
Table 5.4: Relative costs of script execution when updating all components in a tree of N components.
Framework N=128 N=256 N=512 N=1024 N=2048 N=4096 N=8192
Angular 2.0 2.7 3.4 2.7 1.5 0.8 3.0
React 17.0 14.7 13.2 10.1 11.8 5.4 10.5
V ue 10.0 10.7 8.4 7.2 4.55 2.8 3.9
Svelte 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Blazor 14.0 20.0 20.2 25.0 25.1 18.9 25.1
is shown in table 5.5. Here, layout costs are somewhat signiﬁcant due to a large number
of changes in the DOM, but costs are still dominated by script execution. Although the
relative costs diﬀerences are smaller, they are still very signiﬁcant when comparing Blazor
and React to the three other frameworks which update only dynamic content.
Table 5.5: Duration of a full render cycle when updating all components in a tree of N components.
Framework N=128 N=256 N=512 N=1024 N=2048 N=4096 N=8192
Angular 11 31 47 72 115 211 577
React 43 67 91 142 295 419 1068
V ue 29 56 67 106 152 270 542
Svelte 7 13 29 56 82 174 387
Blazor 41 72 126 303 605 1213 2396
38
5.2 Revisiting research questions
In chapter 3, we found diﬀerences with potential performance implications in the rendering
strategies of frontend frameworks. The benchmarks we describe in chapter 4 conﬁrmed
that these diﬀerences are both real and signiﬁcant. We will summarize our ﬁndings by
answering the research questions listed in chapter 1.
5.2.1 RQ1: What rendering strategies are used in web frontend
frameworks?
The rendering strategies we reviewed can be divided into two categories. In the ﬁrst group
are those of React, Vue and Blazor, which utilize a virtual DOM-based approach. This
strategy consists of building a representation the desired state of the DOM, and explicitly
comparing it with a representation of the DOM’s current state and thereby deducing the
changes that must be applied to the DOM to obtain the desired state.
The other group consists of AngularJS, Angular and Svelte, whose rendering strategies
are based on data bindings. Each data binding is associated with some type of work which
can be performed on the DOM when the value of the binding changes. Keeping the DOM
up to date consists of tracking changes to data binding values and applying the required
work whenever changes are detected.
Rendering strategies can also further be characterized by how they determine when the
UI should be updated. AngularJS, React and Blazor depend on the application devel-
oper to initiate an update through the use of relevant library functions. Angular uses a
unique solution which patches browser functionality and automatically schedules an up-
date whenever certain activities such as user interaction take place. Vue and Svelte rely on
a reactivity system, which automatically schedules an update whenever application state
is updated.
5.2.2 RQ2: Which factors aﬀect the performance of each strat-
egy?
The performance of a rendering strategy is decided by ﬁxed costs of creating and updating
individual elements, and the number of elements and components which must be created or
updated. Fixed costs are the primary determining factor when components and elements
39
are initially created, as the input sizes are similar regardless of rendering strategy.
For update loops, we ﬁnd that input sizes are the dominant factor in performance. During
an update loop, React and Blazor opt by default to re-render every component in the
subtree of the component which initiates the update loop. Alone of all frameworks, Angu-
larJS may have cycles in an update loop and walk through the same component multiple
times. Angular, its successor, walks through the entire component tree every time. Vue
and Svelte utilize their reactivity systems to determine exactly which components require
an update, and update those only.
Input sizes for updating individual components also diﬀer between frameworks. Angu-
larJS, Angular, Vue and Svelte only check data bindings for each component to be up-
dated, while React and Blazor opt to reproduce all the contents of every component each
time.
React, Vue and Blazor must perform a separate loop for virtual DOM reconciliation,
which adds a cost speciﬁc to that strategy. The use of WebAssembly in the case of Blazor
adds additional costs by requiring that all DOM API access is mediated by a JavaScript
interoperability layer.
Finally, Angular and Blazor’s rendering implementation includes the insertion of comment
nodes in the DOM under certain circumstances. These increase the size of the DOM node
tree – potentially signiﬁcantly – and thereby incur costs to render tree construction.
5.2.3 RQ3: What are the measured performance diﬀerences be-
tween strategies?
We measure signiﬁcant diﬀerences of at least 50% in ﬁxed costs of creating elements and
components between Svelte with the most performant rendering strategy and its closest
challengers. We also ﬁnd exponentially scaling performance costs in the case of Angular
and React when a single component contains a very large number of child components or
elements.
The most signiﬁcant diﬀerences are found when updating existing components. Here,
diﬀerences in rendering strategies can rise to several orders of magnitude in certain cases
when components with large subtrees are updated. When components contain a large
proportion of static content, we again ﬁnd diﬀerences of up to an order of magnitude in
performance even when an equal number of components is updated.
40
The measured performance diﬀerences are found to be exactly in line with what would
be expected given the input sizes of each rendering strategy as outlined in table 3.1.
The overall strongest update performance is found in Vue and Svelte, which are the only
frameworks we reviewed that are able to guarantee optimal input sizes measured in the
number of components. Angular’s per-component update performance is comparable to
Svelte and Vue, but update loop performance can be orders of magnitude worse when a
small number of components is updated. The worst update performance of the JavaScript-
based frameworks is found with React, with performance ranging from several times to
several orders of magnitude slower than competitors in most update tasks. Its performance
in component and element creation, however, is competitive with other JavaScript-based
frameworks.
The sole WebAssembly-based framework, Blazor, is an outlier with performance several
times worse even than React which has an essentially identical rendering strategy. Our
results do not allow us to conclude whether this is an inherent weakness of WebAssembly,
or one particular to Blazor.
5.2.4 Final thoughts
The purpose of using script-based rendering in browser applications is to enable rich,
responsive user interfaces. Responsiveness is trivial when the UI is simple and contains
few components. Therefore, the diﬀerentiating factor between rendering strategies is how
script execution costs scale as the size and complexity of the component tree grows.
As we have seen, the script execution costs of a given UI update will with certain rendering
strategies depend only on the complexity of the update itself, while others scale with
the complexity of the entire component tree. Rendering strategies of the latter type
are characterized by an inability to automatically determine dirty components, and as a
result suﬀer from a performance cost scaling proﬁle similar to traditional page navigation.
Frameworks using such rendering strategies may be increasingly incapable of ensuring
responsive performance as an application’s complexity grows. At a minimum, they are
likely to require manual optimization of a kind which in other frameworks can be achieved
automatically.
Our results do not allow us to determine what, in practice, constitutes a view complex
enough that script execution costs may become an issue. We found update loops exceeding
100ms in some cases with component trees of approximately 1000 components, but our
41
benchmarks use far simpler components than would be found in real world applications.
Performance issues may therefore in practice arise even with smaller component trees,
particularly for users with resource constrained devices. We have not surveyed component
trees in real-world applications and therefore cannot speculate on what might be a typical
size or complexity of a component tree.
A particular case where script execution costs are likely to be of practical concern are
applications which render large lists of items, especially when each item is complex and
composed of numerous components. When the component containing the list is updated,
such as when adding or removing items, diﬀerences in the scaling of script execution costs
similar to our benchmark scenarios can be expected. Anecdotally, we have implemented
business applications containing such lists which render in excess of 10000 components in
a single view, and the associated performance issues were one of the motivating factors
for this thesis.
In the frameworks we have reviewed, we ﬁnd that the following patterns result in signiﬁcant
performance gains:
• Use of a reactivity system to automatically detect dirty components
• Use of an optimizing compiler to generate component update code which ignores
static content
• Use of binding-based rendering, rather than virtual DOM
The relative performance of the rendering strategies we have reviewed can be approxi-
mately estimated based solely on update loop input sizes. We believe this to be a valid
and practically useful approach to characterizing and comparing script-based rendering
strategies in the browser application context in general.
5.3 Validity of results
All tests were performed on a desktop computer with a Ryzen 5 3600 CPU and 16GB of
RAM. Our results are not directly applicable to devices with diﬀerent speciﬁcations. The
relative amount of work that each framework must perform remains the same regardless
of device, however, and thus their relative results should be similar as well.
42
We did not measure memory usage, which may be an even greater concern to low-end
devices than processing power requirements. During testing, we ran into browser crashes
due to excessive memory allocation. This was most commonly encountered in the case of
Angular and Blazor, which insert signiﬁcant amounts of comment nodes in the DOM and
thereby increase its size and memory consumption.
All tests were performed using Chrome, and the results are likely not identical in other
browsers. Again, however, the fundamental diﬀerences in the frameworks’ rendering strate-
gies can be expected to produce similar relative results regardless of browser. The one
possible exception here is Blazor, where the browser’s WebAssembly implementation could
potentially signiﬁcantly aﬀect its performance.
The components used in our scenarios are necessarily very simple. In a real-world appli-
cation, the number of components would likely seldom reach the higher ends of the ranges
we have tested, while any individual component’s complexity should in almost all cases
be higher. These and other factors which the tested components do not account for will
likely increase the costs of rendering individual components. This is likely to increase
costs particularly for rendering strategies which do not optimize static content or which
perform expensive dirty checks.
The components used in our benchmarks use no custom styling at all and use only the
simplest of elements with minimal attributes. Although we have brought up the proportion
of script execution costs vs. full render cycle costs where it seems relevant, it is likely that
the aspects of rendering not related to script execution would be much more expensive
in a real-world application due to more complex layouts. Our benchmarks hence do not
represent the relative importance of optimizing script execution times compared to other
factors.
Finally, the frameworks we have reviewed are continuously being developed, and their
respective results are only valid for the versions we have tested. A list of software versions
used in this thesis can be found in appendix A.
5.4 Future work
With our benchmarks, we have attempted to build an objective set of tests that accu-
rately represents some of the fundamental diﬀerences between diﬀerent rendering strate-
gies. While we believe that they fulﬁll this purpose, we have not attempted to ensure
43
that the benchmarks are comprehensive, nor can we ensure that they represent real world
workloads. A survey of component tree shapes and component complexity in real world
applications could help in designing a standardized set of tests that more accurately rep-
resents typical applications.
Our benchmarks only compare the performance diﬀerences between diﬀerent frameworks,
but not with diﬀerent rendering strategies entirely. Most obviously useful would be a
comparison with server-side rendering and traditional page navigation. There also exists
a growing number of open source projects which implement a hybrid approach, where
fragments of HTML are rendered server-side and pushed over WebSockets to the browser,
where a minimal amount of scripting is used to mount and unmount fragments to and
from the DOM. Examples of such projects include Phoenix LiveView ∗ and StimulusReﬂex
for Ruby on Rails †. They exist as a direct alternative to client-side rendering, and are an
interesting target for a performance comparison.
This review is not a comprehensive overview of the open source web frontend framework
ecosystem. A more wide review of the entire landscape would be useful, and might turn
up rendering strategies that diﬀer in important ways from the ones we have covered. In
particular, our focus has been primarily on the input sizes of diﬀerent rendering strategies,
but sources of ﬁxed costs could prove to be an equally interesting subject of study.
∗https://phoenixframework.org/
†https://stimulusreﬂex.com/
6 Summary
Traditional page navigation requires the browser to fully re-render a web page whenever
any dynamic interaction occurs. This is often an inadequate approach for applications
with rich user interfaces and real-time interaction requirements. Using browser APIs to
dynamically modify the document overcomes these shortcomings, but is itself fraught with
complexity due to the diﬃculty of managing state transitions in a complex application.
Web frontend frameworks solve this problem by providing a declarative abstraction over
rendering, and have as a consequence surged in popularity in the past decade.
The rendering strategies used in frontend frameworks vary not only in their technical
implementation, but in their performance characteristics. These characteristics may not
be obvious to the application developer using such a framework, yet can have signiﬁcant
consequences for the runtime performance of any application implemented using it. When
choosing a framework for building a web application, it is therefore crucial to understand
the fundamental characteristics of its rendering strategy.
In our review of some of the most popular and inﬂuential frontend frameworks, we ﬁnd
that there are major diﬀerences particularly in the ways they update existing content.
While some frameworks are able to limit an update loop to concern only those parts of
the application which actually need to be updated, others may need to walk through
every component, regardless of whether they need to be updated or not. Similarly, some
frameworks are able to signiﬁcantly optimize rendering of static content by only rendering
it once, whereas others will re-render it on every update.
By benchmarking the frameworks in various situations, we ﬁnd that these theoretical
diﬀerences translate directly into diﬀerences in practical performance, often with an order
of magnitude or more of diﬀerence between diﬀerent strategies. Moreover, we ﬁnd that
there are signiﬁcant diﬀerences even in ﬁxed costs of creating components and elements,
something that every framework must perform an equal amount of when initially rendering
a view. Overall, we ﬁnd that signiﬁcant performance gains are obtained through using
a compiler to optimize rendering of static content, implementing a reactivity system to
accurately track which components need to be updated, and updating the UI based on
individual changes to data bindings rather than explicitly computing the steps required
to update the UI to the desired state.
45
The modern browser is the most ubiquitous application platform in existence today. Given
the ease of sharing content on the Web and the browser’s availability on a huge variety of
devices, this is unlikely to change soon. As the amount of script-driven content increases,
web application performance becomes an increasingly pertinent question particularly on
resource constrained devices. A better understanding of the tools used to produce content,
including their performance characteristics, is therefore a necessity for ensuring that the
Web remains a platform accessible to all.
Bibliography
[1] Alex Rickabaugh. Deep Dive into the Angular Compiler — Alex Rickabaugh — #An-
gularConnect. Sept. 2019. url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=anphffaCZrQ
(visited on 02/17/2021).
[2] Angular - NgZone. url: https://angular.io/guide/zone (visited on 02/22/2021).
[3] AngularJS: Scopes. url: https://docs.angularjs.org/guide/scope (visited on
03/21/2021).
[4] ASP.NET Core Blazor WebAssembly performance best practices. en-us. url: https:
//docs.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/blazor/webassembly-performance-
best-practices (visited on 03/21/2021).
[5] E. Bainomugisha, A. L. Carreton, T. v. Cutsem, S. Mostinckx, and W. d. Meuter.
“A survey on reactive programming”. en. In: ACM Computing Surveys 45.4 (Aug.
2013), pp. 1–34. issn: 0360-0300, 1557-7341. doi: 10.1145/2501654.2501666. url:
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2501654.2501666 (visited on 02/22/2021).
[6] P. Bille. “A survey on tree edit distance and related problems”. en. In: Theoretical
Computer Science 337.1-3 (June 2005), pp. 217–239. issn: 03043975. doi: 10.1016/
j.tcs.2004.12.030 . url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0304397505000174 (visited on 02/19/2021).
[7] D. J. Bouvier. “Versions and standards of HTML”. In: ACM SIGAPP Applied Com-
puting Review 3.2 (Oct. 1995), pp. 9–15. issn: 1559-6915. doi: 10.1145/228228.
228232. url: http://doi.org/10.1145/228228.228232 (visited on 03/28/2021).
[8] Brian Ford. Brian Ford - Zones - NG-Conf 2014 . Jan. 2014. url: https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=3IqtmUscE_U&t=150 (visited on 02/22/2021).
[9] A. Clark. acdlite/react-ﬁber-architecture. original-date: 2016-07-19T01:15:34Z. Feb.
2021. url: https://github.com/acdlite/react- fiber- architecture (visited
on 02/17/2021).
[10] Constructing the Object Model — Web Fundamentals. en. url: https://developers.
google . com / web / fundamentals / performance / critical - rendering - path /
constructing-the-object-model (visited on 02/17/2021).
48
[11] Critical rendering path - MDN . url: https : / / developer . mozilla . org / en -
US/docs/Web/Performance/Critical_rendering_path (visited on 02/17/2021).
[12] Evan You. Evan You on what’s coming in Vue 3.0 . VueConf Toronto, Jan. 2019.
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Hgt9HYaCDA (visited on 02/22/2021).
[13] J. Gossman. Introduction to Model/View/ViewModel pattern for building WPF apps.
en-us. Oct. 2005. url: https://docs.microsoft.com/en- us/archive/blogs/
johngossman/introduction-to-modelviewviewmodel-pattern-for-building-
wpf-apps (visited on 02/25/2021).
[14] A. Haas, A. Rossberg, D. L. Schuﬀ, B. L. Titzer, M. Holman, D. Gohman, L. Wag-
ner, A. Zakai, and J. Bastien. “Bringing the web up to speed with WebAssem-
bly”. In: Proceedings of the 38th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Lan-
guage Design and Implementation . PLDI 2017. New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, June 2017, pp. 185–200. isbn: 978-1-4503-4988-8. doi:
10.1145/3062341.3062363 . url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3062341.3062363
(visited on 04/05/2021).
[15] L. T. Hau. Compile Svelte in your head (Part 1) — Tan Li Hau . url: https :
//lihautan.com/compile- svelte- in- your- head- part- 1/#compile- svelte-
in-your-head (visited on 03/21/2021).
[16] M. Hevery and A. Abrons. “Declarative web-applications without server: demon-
stration of how a fully functional web-application can be built in an hour with only
HTML, CSS & Javascript Library”. en. In: Proceeding of the 24th ACM SIGPLAN
conference companion on Object oriented programming systems languages and ap-
plications - OOPSLA ’09 . Orlando, Florida, USA: ACM Press, 2009, p. 801. isbn:
978-1-60558-768-4. doi: 10.1145/1639950.1640022 . url: http://dl.acm.org/
citation.cfm?doid=1639950.1640022 (visited on 02/18/2021).
[17] P. Hunt, P. O’Shannessy, D. Smith, and T. Coatta. “React: Facebook’s Functional
Turn on Writing JavaScript: A discussion with Pete Hunt, Paul O’Shannessy, Dave
Smith and Terry Coatta”. In: Queue 14.4 (Aug. 2016), pp. 96–112. issn: 1542-7730.
doi: 10 . 1145 / 2984629 . 2994373. url: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2984629 .
2994373 (visited on 02/19/2021).
[18] JavaScript Reaches the Final Frontier: Space . en. url: https://www.infoq.com/
news/2020/06/javascript-spacex-dragon/ (visited on 03/27/2021).
49
[19] Kara Erickson. How Angular works — Kara Erickson — #AngularConnect . Sept.
2019. url: https : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = S0o - 4yc2n - 8(visited on
02/17/2021).
[20] Main thread - MDN Web Docs . url: https : / / developer . mozilla . org / en -
US/docs/Glossary/Main_thread (visited on 03/28/2021).
[21] A. Mesbah and A. van Deursen. “Migrating Multi-page Web Applications to Single-
page AJAX Interfaces”. In:Proceedings of the 11th European Conference on Software
Maintenance and Reengineering . CSMR ’07. USA: IEEE Computer Society, Mar.
2007, pp. 181–190. isbn: 978-0-7695-2802-1. doi: 10 . 1109 / CSMR . 2007 . 33. url:
https://doi.org/10.1109/CSMR.2007.33 (visited on 03/27/2021).
[22] L. A. Meyerovich and R. Bodik. “Fast and parallel webpage layout”. In: Proceedings
of the 19th international conference on World wide web . WWW ’10. New York, NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Apr. 2010, pp. 711–720. isbn: 978-1-
60558-799-8. doi: 10.1145/1772690.1772763 . url: http://doi.org/10.1145/
1772690.1772763 (visited on 04/03/2021).
[23] R. B. Miller. “Response time in man-computer conversational transactions”. en. In:
Proceedings of the December 9-11, 1968, fall joint computer conference, part I on -
AFIPS ’68 (Fall, part I) . San Francisco, California: ACM Press, 1968, p. 267. doi:
10.1145/1476589.1476628. url: http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=
1476589.1476628 (visited on 04/03/2021).
[24] L. D. Paulson. “Building rich web applications with Ajax”. In: Computer 38.10 (Oct.
2005). Conference Name: Computer, pp. 14–17. issn: 1558-0814. doi: 10.1109/MC.
2005.330.
[25] M. Pawlik and N. Augsten. “Eﬃcient Computation of the Tree Edit Distance”. en.
In: ACM Transactions on Database Systems 40.1 (Mar. 2015), pp. 1–40. issn: 0362-
5915, 1557-4644. doi: 10. 1145/2699485 . url: https: //dl. acm.org /doi/ 10 .
1145/2699485 (visited on 02/19/2021).
[26] React Top-Level API – React . en. url: https : / / reactjs . org / docs / react -
api.html (visited on 03/21/2021).
[27] Reactivity in Depth — Vue.js . url: https://v3.vuejs.org/guide/reactivity.
html#what-is-reactivity (visited on 03/21/2021).
[28] Reconciliation – React. en. url: https://reactjs.org/docs/reconciliation.
html (visited on 02/19/2021).
50
[29] Render-tree Construction — Web Fundamentals . en. url: https://developers.
google . com / web / fundamentals / performance / critical - rendering - path /
render-tree-construction (visited on 03/28/2021).
[30] S. Sanderson. Shadow/virtual DOM in blazor · Issue #23428 · dotnet/aspnetcore.
en. url: https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/issues/23428 (visited on
03/21/2021).
[31] P. Snyder, L. Ansari, C. Taylor, and C. Kanich. “Browser Feature Usage on the
Modern Web”. In: Proceedings of the 2016 Internet Measurement Conference . IMC
’16. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Nov. 2016, pp. 97–
110. isbn: 978-1-4503-4526-2. doi: 10.1145/2987443.2987466. url: https://doi.
org/10.1145/2987443.2987466 (visited on 03/27/2021).
[32] State and Lifecycle – React . en. url: https://reactjs.org/docs/state- and-
lifecycle.html (visited on 03/21/2021).
[33] A. Taivalsaari, T. Mikkonen, C. Pautasso, and K. Syst¨ a. “Comparing the Built-In
Application Architecture Models in the Web Browser”. In: 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Software Architecture (ICSA). Apr. 2017, pp. 51–54. doi: 10.1109/
ICSA.2017.23.
[34] A. Taivalsaari, T. Mikkonen, K. Syst¨ a, and C. Pautasso. “Web User Interface Im-
plementation Technologies: An Underview:” en. In: Proceedings of the 14th Inter-
national Conference on Web Information Systems and Technologies . Seville, Spain:
SCITEPRESS - Science and Technology Publications, 2018, pp. 127–136. isbn: 978-
989-758-324-7. doi: 10.5220/0006885401270136. url: http://www.scitepress.
org/DigitalLibrary/Link.aspx?doi=10.5220/0006885401270136 (visited on
09/24/2020).
[35] T. Van Cutsem and M. S. Miller. “Proxies: design principles for robust object-
oriented intercession APIs”. In: ACM SIGPLAN Notices 45.12 (Oct. 2010), pp. 59–
72. issn: 0362-1340. doi: 10.1145/1899661.1869638. url: https://doi.org/10.
1145/1899661.1869638 (visited on 04/05/2021).
[36] Victor Savkin. Change Detection Reinvented Victor Savkin. Mar. 2015. url: https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=jvKGQSFQf10 (visited on 02/25/2021).
[37] Z. Wang, F. X. Lin, L. Zhong, and M. Chishtie. “Why are web browsers slow on
smartphones?” In: Proceedings of the 12th Workshop on Mobile Computing Sys-
tems and Applications . HotMobile ’11. New York, NY, USA: Association for Com-
51
puting Machinery, Mar. 2011, pp. 91–96. isbn: 978-1-4503-0649-2. doi: 10.1145/
2184489.2184508. url: http://doi.org/10.1145/2184489.2184508 (visited on
03/28/2021).
[38] WebAssembly Concepts — MDN . url: https : / / developer . mozilla . org / en -
US/docs/WebAssembly/Concepts (visited on 03/28/2021).
[39] A. Wirfs-Brock and B. Eich. “JavaScript: the ﬁrst 20 years”. In: Proceedings of the
ACM on Programming Languages 4.HOPL (June 2020), 77:1–77:189. doi: 10.1145/
3386327. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3386327 (visited on 03/25/2021).
Appendix A Software versions
The following software versions were used in this thesis:
Name Version
Angular 11.2.3
React 17.0.1
V ue 3.0.7
Svelte 3.35.0
Blazor 5.0.3
Chrome 89.0.4389.90
Appendix B Full benchmark results
A full list of results from our benchmarks is included below. For each benchmark, we
measured script execution times and total render cycle times separately, and have included
their respective results accordingly. All results are in milliseconds, rounded to the closest
millisecond.
ii Appendix B
Table B.1: Group 1: Creating static elements - script execution time
N Angular React Vue Svelte Blazor
1 0 0 0 0 1
100 2 2 2 1 3
200 4 3 3 1 4
300 7 5 3 1 5
400 8 6 5 1 6
500 9 9 5 2 7
600 11 7 7 2 8
700 12 8 7 2 9
800 13 9 10 2 10
900 15 10 11 2 11
1000 17 11 11 3 13
2000 36 25 24 7 23
3000 55 40 29 9 36
4000 72 56 33 13 47
5000 84 76 36 16 60
6000 100 95 39 17 71
7000 114 115 43 19 81
8000 132 138 47 20 92
9000 154 166 50 23 103
10000 175 197 53 26 121
15000 305 386 67 37 191
20000 561 635 85 46 283
25000 845 963 104 54 368
30000 1096 1375 118 63 467
35000 1405 1761 142 70 574
40000 1739 2264 155 80 684
45000 2111 2880 174 90 797
50000 2539 3559 190 102 921
Appendix B iii
Table B.2: Group 1: Creating static elements - total render time
N Angular React Vue Svelte Blazor
1 5 5 5 4 5
100 7 7 7 4 6
200 8 10 7 5 8
300 12 11 7 6 10
400 13 13 9 5 10
500 16 18 11 7 12
600 19 16 11 9 14
700 23 18 15 7 14
800 24 20 18 9 19
900 27 19 18 10 21
1000 32 21 20 8 20
2000 62 51 50 14 44
3000 92 77 65 32 66
4000 118 103 77 57 87
5000 142 134 89 77 109
6000 170 164 103 89 128
7000 196 196 125 102 148
8000 225 231 141 115 169
9000 259 270 156 129 189
10000 294 313 171 143 224
15000 484 562 244 215 349
20000 802 873 329 286 502
25000 1150 1264 410 358 644
30000 1463 1738 488 431 792
35000 1839 2185 572 498 959
40000 2233 2750 644 567 1124
45000 2667 3429 728 637 1297
50000 3160 4171 802 719 1476
iv Appendix B
Table B.3: Group 1: Creating components with a single parent - script execution time
N Angular React Vue Svelte Blazor
1 0 0 0 0 1
100 5 3 4 1 9
200 7 7 9 2 13
300 10 11 11 2 18
400 13 14 15 4 23
500 16 16 20 5 28
600 20 18 23 7 32
700 24 21 27 8 37
800 29 25 30 9 42
900 33 28 34 9 47
1000 35 28 34 10 52
2000 59 55 67 21 106
3000 76 77 80 30 161
4000 88 98 93 34 214
5000 102 122 105 40 268
6000 108 151 122 47 318
7000 120 177 129 50 371
8000 126 207 139 55 421
9000 132 243 147 60 493
10000 140 278 169 72 557
15000 164 507 193 95 858
20000 186 782 242 131 1181
25000 208 1128 282 152 1501
30000 231 1532 309 168 1826
35000 256 2019 355 190 2222
40000 280 2553 390 213 2615
45000 339 3169 428 230 3016
50000 364 3840 473 252 3451
Appendix B v
Table B.4: Group 1: Creating components with a single parent - total render time
N Angular React Vue Svelte Blazor
1 4 4 4 4 5
100 11 8 9 5 13
200 16 13 15 8 17
300 22 18 18 10 24
400 28 23 24 10 30
500 34 27 31 13 36
600 41 29 34 15 42
700 48 31 39 18 47
800 56 35 44 18 53
900 62 42 49 23 59
1000 66 42 50 21 65
2000 118 83 92 42 127
3000 163 114 116 66 192
4000 206 146 139 78 255
5000 252 179 162 99 319
6000 293 220 192 121 378
7000 334 257 211 135 442
8000 375 300 232 151 504
9000 417 347 250 168 587
10000 455 394 286 194 663
15000 646 684 372 279 1019
20000 837 1023 482 379 1401
25000 1023 1432 585 469 1775
30000 1211 1898 671 548 2156
35000 1413 2450 779 635 2607
40000 1600 3043 875 723 3059
45000 1827 3719 980 813 3527
50000 2019 4453 1090 900 4007
vi Appendix B
Table B.5: Group 1: Creating components as a binary tree - script execution time
N Angular React Vue Svelte Blazor
2 2 1 1 0 3
4 2 1 2 1 3
8 3 1 2 1 3
16 4 2 3 1 4
32 6 2 5 1 6
64 11 4 8 2 9
128 20 7 16 3 17
256 41 15 31 6 30
512 75 32 53 10 59
1024 120 55 84 22 128
2048 162 86 132 43 241
4096 216 137 223 83 485
8192 297 233 313 142 966
16384 469 394 485 233 1870
32768 774 733 897 482 3644
65536 1358 1365 1611 771 7390
Appendix B vii
Table B.6: Group 1: Creating components as a binary tree - total render time
N Angular React Vue Svelte Blazor
2 6 5 6 5 6
4 6 5 6 5 6
8 6 6 6 5 6
16 8 6 6 4 7
32 12 6 8 5 10
64 18 10 12 7 13
128 34 14 24 7 23
256 65 26 39 10 39
512 117 45 72 22 74
1024 204 77 115 53 153
2048 332 142 190 101 290
4096 556 249 340 198 585
8192 992 464 549 375 1172
16384 1878 858 953 696 2272
32768 3654 1669 1836 1407 4446
65536 7210 3253 3483 2625 8991
viii Appendix B
Table B.7: Group 2: Updating the root component - script execution time
N Angular React Vue Svelte Blazor
2 0 1 0 0 2
4 0 1 1 0 3
8 0 1 1 0 3
16 1 1 1 0 3
32 1 2 1 0 2
64 2 3 1 0 3
128 4 7 1 0 2
256 7 13 1 0 3
512 12 23 1 0 2
1024 17 42 1 0 3
2048 23 53 1 0 3
4096 32 93 1 0 7
8192 29 148 5 0 8
16384 43 212 1 0 3
32768 119 387 1 0 5
65536 124 874 8 0 3
Appendix B ix
Table B.8: Group 2: Updating the root component - total render time
N Angular React Vue Svelte Blazor
2 5 4 5 5 6
4 5 5 5 4 6
8 5 5 4 3 6
16 4 4 4 5 6
32 4 6 4 5 6
64 5 8 5 6 6
128 8 12 4 7 5
256 12 16 5 7 6
512 17 32 9 8 6
1024 26 47 5 4 9
2048 37 59 6 5 10
4096 53 105 13 10 20
8192 60 166 20 12 28
16384 98 237 26 22 41
32768 224 439 48 24 51
65536 330 975 101 42 86
x Appendix B
Table B.9: Group 2: Updating a leaf component - script execution time
N Angular React Vue Svelte Blazor
2 0 0 0 0 1
4 0 0 0 0 1
8 0 0 0 0 1
16 1 0 0 0 1
32 1 0 0 0 1
64 2 0 0 0 1
128 4 0 0 0 1
256 8 0 0 0 1
512 11 0 0 0 1
1024 16 1 0 0 1
2048 23 3 0 0 1
4096 31 3 0 0 5
8192 32 5 0 0 6
16384 44 3 0 0 2
32768 115 3 0 0 8
65536 125 7 6 0 2
Appendix B xi
Table B.10: Group 2: Updating a leaf component - total render time
N Angular React Vue Svelte Blazor
2 5 4 4 5 4
4 5 4 5 5 4
8 4 4 4 4 4
16 5 5 5 5 5
32 5 5 5 6 5
64 5 7 4 7 6
128 8 3 4 7 5
256 13 4 4 6 4
512 18 4 5 4 4
1024 25 5 5 3 6
2048 37 8 6 3 7
4096 52 14 13 6 18
8192 63 26 24 5 26
16384 100 27 25 11 40
32768 221 51 45 5 60
65536 330 87 91 7 86
Table B.11: Group 3: Updating the root component - script execution time
N Angular React Vue Svelte Blazor
2 0 1 1 0 3
4 0 2 0 0 2
8 0 5 1 0 3
16 0 10 0 0 2
32 1 15 0 0 2
64 2 28 1 0 3
128 3 34 1 0 4
256 5 43 1 0 3
512 14 64 1 0 3
1024 23 98 4 0 13
2048 20 225 1 0 10
4096 24 278 1 0 8
8192 148 806 8 0 7
xii Appendix B
Table B.12: Group 3: Updating the root component - total render time
N Angular React Vue Svelte Blazor
2 5 5 5 5 7
4 6 6 6 5 7
8 7 11 8 8 9
16 4 13 8 12 6
32 5 19 5 26 6
64 6 32 15 4 7
128 7 40 6 4 13
256 24 61 7 5 8
512 29 77 12 14 16
1024 34 114 14 25 48
2048 40 240 16 17 62
4096 59 307 24 30 100
8192 219 850 58 101 83
Table B.13: Group 3: Updating all components - script execution time
N Angular React Vue Svelte Blazor
2 0 1 1 0 3
4 0 2 1 0 3
8 0 4 2 0 4
16 1 9 3 1 5
32 1 15 6 1 8
64 2 28 10 1 14
128 4 34 20 2 28
256 8 44 32 3 60
512 17 66 42 5 101
1024 27 101 72 10 250
2048 29 235 91 20 502
4096 44 289 149 54 1020
8192 238 841 311 80 2013
Appendix B xiii
Table B.14: Group 3: Updating all components - total render time
N Angular React Vue Svelte Blazor
2 6 5 5 6 7
4 7 6 6 5 8
8 5 8 8 9 9
16 5 15 10 7 9
32 7 19 12 10 14
64 9 35 21 5 20
128 11 43 29 7 41
256 31 67 56 13 72
512 47 91 67 29 126
1024 72 142 106 56 303
2048 115 295 152 82 605
4096 211 419 270 174 1213
8192 577 1068 542 387 2396